Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes today. I'm chatting
with Angela bossa. She's the
director of data science at
I robot. And how are
you today? I'm great. Scott,
how are you? I am
very happy to be chatting
with you. I understand that
you were just in Portland,
but I missed you by
a couple of weeks. What
were you doing in Portland?
Yeah, so I was there
for a CSV comp, which
is a data science conference
that's community run, and it
taught a lot of folks
talk about open data and
the wonderful things they do
with it. That was really
fun. CSV cough. This is
a like, is it comma
separated, values comp? It is.
It is. In fact it's
CSV, comma conch. Although I
think the website is just
CSV, confe.org, if I'm not
mistaken and, and it's run
by some folks out of
Portland and Berkeley. So I
definitely recommend they are not,
it's not an annual conference.
I'm not sure when their
next edition will be, but
I recommend folks who are
interested in, in open data
work to check it out.
That's very cool. I love
that name, that I think
that's the coolest conference name
I've heard since notepad cough.
It's just like, cool. Yeah,
that sounds like a great
name. Exactly. So you're a,
you're a data scientist, but
when I look at your,
your LinkedIn, as we always
do, we always looking at
each other's LinkedIn's. I see
that I'm seeing background in
math and not in programming.
Do you identify as a
programmer or are you, what
is it, how does a
data scientist, a mathematician and
a programmer come together? What's
that Venn diagram look like?
Yeah, the Venn diagram. So,
so I am not a
programmer or at least I
don't consider myself one, I
have written programs, but it's
sort of the same way
that, you know, I have
sung karaoke, but I would
never consider myself a singer.
It's sort of a, the
analogy that I work with.
So I have written programs.
And in, in, when you're
working in data science, there's
sort of this semantic exercise
of what is data science
that, that placates pretty much
every conversation where two data
scientists by whatever definition are
together. And, and a lot
of folks say, you know,
it's, it's the overlap of,
of domain expertise, computer science
skills and math and statistics
skills. And that's totally true,
which is why I am
a recovering data scientist, but
I am now management because
there are people who have
much better hone skills in
the, in, in the programming
arena. And what I find
that I bring to the
table is, is the language
component. It's the translation where
I can speak, you know,
business and, and legalese and
securities and data and math.
And I can speak programming,
even if I can't do
it super well. I know
the music theory behind it.
I know the circle of
fifths. I just, I can't
hold a pitch kind of
thing. Interesting. That makes me
wonder, I should probably have
a conductor and orchestra person
on the show sometime and
find out if they know
how to play a musical
instrument or just, just wave
their arms in an appropriate
way that works for everyone.
Exactly. So when did you
discover data science? If you
started out doing math, You
know, I discovered data science
under that moniker probably around
2013 or yeah, 2013, 2014
is when I learned of
the word. It's sort of
interesting when you talk to
people, you know, what is
accounting? What does an accountant
do? You know, there's been
accounting for probably hundreds of
years, you know, lawyers, doctors,
those are professions that if
they're in an organization, you
sort of know where they
go data science. It's, it's
very recent. I think the
first time that the, the
word was, was used in
print was in the late
fifties and some military manual
of some kind. So, so
I heard the term very
late in the game. At
that point, I had already
been, you know, a professional
nerd in some capacity for,
for quite a while. And,
and I, I learned of
it when I was working
in marketing and programmatic marketing
after having spent almost a
decade in, in strategy consulting
and so throughout. So, so
my math degree, I employed
it in all sorts of
ways until I learned that,
that I had some agency,
I sort of felt like
on a conveyor belt, I
got recruited into re very
nice jobs and investment banking
and whatnot. And it just
wasn't something that I was,
I felt passionate about when
I worked with, with the
marketing data. It was so
large, there was so much
of it. It was, you
know, there were unstructured and
that's sort of, at that
point is when I learned
the, the nomenclature and the
jargon. And then that's when
I decided this is the
profession that I really want
to go into. And so
I did a couple of,
I had a couple of
roles after that. And then
I went into management because
programming a computer is really,
really fun, but programming humans
is really fun. And, you
know, you can pay somebody
to keep a seat warm,
but you can't pay somebody
to think and solve a
problem. So you're as passionate
about math and data science,
as you are about leadership
and keeping people excited about
their jobs. I really am.
I really am. I think
that's, that's where my Venn
diagram of the things that
I'm good at, the things
that the world needs and
the things that I didn't
get paid to do sort
of overlap. Would you call
that kind of a non
traditional path into the, into
the tech industry and then
becoming the, you know, the
director and the team lead
of a group Into the
tech industry, certainly into data
science, into data science? No,
because I'm not sure there
exists a traditional path. Hmm.
That's a good point. It
hasn't been around long enough.
It really hasn't. And so
it's, there was there, there
are a couple of podcasts
that I really liked that
I would recommend it to
anybody interested in data science,
check out my Twitter feed.
I usually talk about these,
these things that I'm listening
to, and there's a lot
of gatekeeping that's starting to
creep up in data science,
which is annoying to me.
What do you mean by
that gatekeeping? I mean, by
that folks who have what
they deemed to be a
traditional path, because that's the,
the breadth of experience that
they've had, and they're confusing
that with the normal distribution.
And so they think that
that N of one, or
that N of five is
the one true way. And
so it usually has to
do with, you know, early
access to math education or
computer science or folks who
had parents or, or uncles,
or, or guides very early
on who had PhDs and
were not, you know, I,
when I graduated, nobody in
my family has a PhD.
And so I, I thought
I really wanted to go
down that route, but I
had no idea, none whatsoever,
even with the background that
I did have, which was
incredibly fortunate, right. I went
to a really good school,
even then I was sort
of thrown to what's the
next step? How does this
work, wait, what are grants
do I pay for this?
This is really expensive. I
can't afford this kind of
mentality. And so I think,
yeah, I think it's important
to, to, to highlight that
folks can get into it
anyway. And these gatekeepers really
need to, to think about
how the folks who are
listening to them are receiving
that message. Hm that's interesting.
Are you familiar with the,
the, the fallacy of no
true Scotsman? Yes. That's exactly
what this is. Yeah. So
for people who are listening,
who may not be familiar
with that, it's this idea
that you, you have some
generalization and the way that
you poke at it or
ruin it is by giving
counter examples. So someone says,
and I can say this,
cause I'm a Scotsman. My
family's from Scotland. Someone says,
no, no Scotsman puts sugar
on his porridge and makes
a big generalization like that.
And then someone else says,
well, my uncle Angus, he
likes sugar on his porridge.
And then they change the
definition. Well, well, no true
Scotsman put sugar in his
porch. So the gatekeepers can
do that with the definition
of a data. No true
data scientist does this thereby
changing the goalposts, as we
say, and moving the, the,
the finish line. Right. And
so if you haven't had,
you know, if you haven't
mastered calculus, you couldn't possibly
be able to, to appreciate
or perform well in this
field. Oh, well, I meant,
you know, I meant multi-variate
calculus. Well, no, I meant
partial derivatives and no, I
meant linear algebra. And it
just, they're all of these
terms that they don't mean
a thing. I mean, all
we're, nobody's storming the beaches
of Normandy, you know, we
are sitting in front of
a computer and we're trying
to get it to do
something we're trying to infer
understanding from data. And so
it's much more important to
have an, an understanding of
what that means from the
fact that data are just
artifacts of processes. And so
it's really important to understand
the process that generated that
data, you know, data isn't
truth data is a version
of truth that got captured
in time. And so having
that kind of understanding is
much more important than the
statistics. Notwithstanding the fact that
statistics are really important to
it sort of statistics you
can learn, but you also
can learn about systems. It's,
there's not one thing that
without which you can't succeed
in the, in the space.
Interesting. So that makes me,
that brings up in my
mind and interesting question, you
know, when we talk about
like moral decisions, someone will
say, well, the end justifies
the means, and you had
talked about how, you know,
getting the result. That's, you
know, success is a pretty
good metric. If you write
a program and the right
answer pops out, the other
end, that's pretty successful, whether
you're a non traditional data
scientist or not, you know,
maybe back up a few
years and then your claim
to fame. And one of
the things that you won
an award for was something
of a program that you
wrote. Maybe you could tell
us about that. Yeah. So
it was a team effort.
So I can't claim a
lot of the, the, the
credit, but this was several
years back. It was the
Edelman award for operations research
in. And what we did
is we were working with
a seed company and they,
they were just starting to
use data more intelligently. And
so what they did is
based on the data that
they had gathered on how
soybeans grew all over the
world, you know, North Northern
hemisphere, Southern hemisphere, taking advantage
of, of non interrupted summers,
all sorts of stuff. They
wanted to make sure that
at the end of the
simulation, they would know how
to plant their soybeans so
that they had enough seed
at the end of the
whole process to supply the
market. And so you don't
want to have too much
seed. Cause if people aren't
buying, then you have storage
problems. I mean, there's all
sorts of complications that we
had to account for. And
so I wrote this program,
I that's, I didn't write
this program. I duct taped
this thing. And this is
before stack overflow was a
thing that I knew about.
So I cobbled it together
and it got the right
answer at the end. And
that was actually the version
that got submitted for evaluation
and to complete the, the
whole calculation, it actually took
something close to 24 hours,
which is, this is running
on, on a, a powerful
desktop computer. This is before
cloud or anything. And yeah,
and then they brought in
somebody who knows what they're
doing, not in terms of
understanding the systems and, and
understanding the stats and the
underlying math. You know, a
lot of what I had
to do is I had
to fly to Minnesota and
Iowa and talk to a
lot of farmers and really
understand what it was that
they were doing and extract
that knowledge that was below
their set, their, their level
of awareness. Right. I can't
ask them these specific technical
mathematical questions. They have no
clue. Right. I have to
ask them, when do you
plant and why, and why
do you choose to plant
it this way? And, and
in any case, so that's,
that was what my contribution
was. But then afterwards, they
brought somebody in who knows
programming, who took all of
that work that I had
put together and actually wrote
it correctly. And now he
runs in three minutes. Oh
my God, of course. But
it definitely puts the whole
kind of big O notation
concept, right. In a very
visceral way. I mean, yes,
somebody, somebody found your nested
four loop and fixed it,
but at the same time,
though, it did work other
than the fact that it
was slow. Maybe we could
have thrown more hardware at
it and it would have
happened in three minutes. We
certainly could. And again, this
is, this was in 2011,
2012. So this is a
while back. And, and, and
the interesting thing, and this
is something that I believe
very strongly. This is what
I, I spoke about when
I went to CSV comp,
is that there are all
sorts of different dimensions within
which we are excellent, but
there are so many more
dimensions that, that we are
not excellent in. And, and
what you want to do
is you want to have
teams of excellent people who
have each other's backs, who
cover each other's blind spots.
And so you can try
to find that one human
who is really excellent at
all the things that are
important to you, but that
aid, that doesn't scale, be
things of importance aren't permanent.
And those things also fluctuate.
And that's why, you know,
my having this awesome ability
in one sense, you know,
mathematically, but, but not having
it in programming, which isn't
something that I don't think
I couldn't overcome. I just
haven't dedicated the time. That's
what I think when you
put together a team that
covers all of those spots,
you just have such a
much more resilient, both, both
chance that both product, but
also roadmap because your priorities
now can change and you
can adapt without giving up
excellence. So it sounds like
if I can put words
in your mouth, you're probably
against the idea of the
rockstar programmer or the unicorn
that knows everything. The full
stack developer, who is an
expert in everything. So I
do believe so. I do
believe they exist. I'm not
saying they don't exist. Well,
maybe they're not as strategy
for team building, I guess,
as well. Exactly what it
is. I think there's, there's
this research and Oh, I
wish I would remember Amy
Edmondson. I think I may
be misspelling. Her last name
is pronouncing it, but she
did some research on this
concept of super chickens. Have
you heard of super chickens?
I have not, but I
know that Amy Edmonson was
a professor of leadership at
Harvard and did a Ted
talk. Yes. And so I
think it's her. It may,
I may be confusing them.
So I'll send you the
correct information to put on
show notes. That way people
can't not find the correct
information because my memory is
a faulty, but anyway, super
chickens is this concept. So
the research was they put
some chickens together and they
measured their outcome by how
many eggs they laid. And
so they, they picked the
best ones by this metric.
And they started selecting the
populations and creating these populations
that were made up only
of the best. And then
they put together this hyper
best population of only super
chickens. And what ended up
happening is that they all
killed each other. So I
believe that there are these
programmers who can elevate the
quality of the rest of
the team, as long as
they don't have, you know,
detrimental qualities of, you know,
putting down other people, harassing
people, being unethical, things that
you shouldn't compromise, but some
companies do for some reason,
as long as those things,
aren't there. Unicorns short can
elevate the rest of the
team. But the problem is
when you try to create
a team of only unicorns,
first of all, it's going
to take you forever to
staff because they're hard to
find and they are, they
know they're there they're worth.
The second thing is going
to be really expensive cause
they know what their value
is. It's part of what
makes them a 10 X
or a hundred X whatever.
And, but the other thing
is that it tends to
be highly correlated with an
inflated sense of self worth.
So they may think that
they're a 10 X, but
they act like they're a
50 X, which causes all
sorts of imbalances and all
sorts of, you know, the
juice ends up not being
worth the squeeze. Oh, interesting.
You know, it makes me
think about the times when
you watch a movie and
someone's trying to create a
super soldier and they always
have like the, you know,
kind of the dungeon, Dungeons
and dragons card where it's
like, we need maximum strength
and maximum intelligence, but no
one ever seems to optimize
for niceness and team building.
You know, when you put
them together. Well, the super
soldiers, you know, to make
sure that they're super nice
and get along. Yeah. My
grandmother used to always say
which, you know, with, with
the, the, the type of
folks, the self selection of
folks who go into tech,
this is highly relevant. She
used to say that God
has two cups, one of
common sense and one of,
sort of street smart, and
one of book-smart and only
so much water in the
pitcher. And for every person,
he either fills up the
book-smart fills up the street
smart, or there's a balance.
And, and I think that's
very true. There's a self
selection of folks who go
into tech professions, where, where
they have a lot of
book-smart and not a lot
of street smartware knowing that,
you know, building a strong
coalition is important. Being resilient
to strategy is important and
being kind, I don't know
if being nice, but being
kind, you know, kindness includes
telling somebody that they've stepped
over the line. This includes
telling somebody, Hey, I noticed
that you have this gap
in your knowledge. Here's how
you can fix that. And
kindness means being able to
welcome that feedback. It would
be nice if kindness were,
were more appreciated in tech.
Sometimes this is something I've
been a proponent of for
many years. And I feel
like people believe that being
nice or being kind is
a form of weakness. And
you know, if one word,
if want it to be
excellent, like let's just, let's
let Linus be Linus. You
know, he doesn't have to
be pleasant. He's, you know,
talk is cheap. Show me
the code. Right. It doesn't
matter if he said it
with 12 F words and
insulted a whole class of
people while he was doing
the, the source code commit.
That's insane to me because
there are so many intangibles
in that equation, just the,
the code works. Sure. But
how much are you going
to have to pay out
in, in health insurance? Because
everybody needs a therapist or
because everybody's immune system is
compromised because they're so stressed.
You know, these, these are
actual impactful to the bottom
line numbers that just somehow
get brushed under the carpet
as well. Those don't matter
because of X, Y, and
Z. Right? And, and it,
and that's where the kindness
comes in. Kindness is a
muscle, right? You can exercise
it, you can prioritize it.
And, and it has tangible
impacts to the bottom line.
Yep. We don't want these
super chickson super chickens killing
everyone. I did find the
information on that. It was
Margaret Heffernan talked about super
chickens in a Ted talk
and the experiment itself was
named by a geneticist named
William William Muir. That's right. So
there's another, there's another something
interesting from, from Amy, which
I think is a Ted
talk that you mentioned, right?
That, that I also bring
up in my talk, those
two studies I think are
really interesting. Right? So between
Amy Edmonson, am I going
to have Heffernan? You've got
a pretty good bunch of
research into egos and equality
and leadership and how those
things fit in. Right. And
how to create sustainable high
performance teams that don't break
the bank. Right? Like this
is, this is money balling.
Yeah. It is. Well, how
do you also not break
your break, your engineers? When,
like, for example, if you
tell someone to get some
piece of work done or
you assign them some task,
does it matter to you?
If you, for example, discovered
after the fact that that
person worked 16 hours for
three days and was up
all night and missed their
child's birthday, did it all
silently though, without complaint to
get the job done. And
then, you know, months later
you discovered that they've been
killing themselves to get that
work done. I think that's
why there's 7 billion of us
right there, different clocks and
different folks marched to a
different drummer. So in what,
what I would do is
I would go to this
person and try to make
it abundantly clear that they
understood that that was not
required, neither required nor expected,
but if there's, you know,
and if they want to
make that up otherwise so
that, you know, now they
can go on a vacation
that isn't an extra couple
of days longer and we'll
work it out HR, and
we'll figure something out too,
to offset it or to
ensure that they're not burning
out. I might recommend that
they go, you know, take
a couple of days off,
go, go play a video
game who cares? Right. But
if they don't want that,
and they didn't feel that
that was expected. And that
was just as internal drive
that they have because they
wanted to deliver the best
and they knew they could
do it. That's great. You
know, I'm not gonna tell
anybody I folks have agency.
I'm not going to tell
anybody, you know, I'm not
going to tell you how
to apportion your time. I'm
not going to ask, right?
I'm not going to ask
you to keep the seat
warm. I have absolutely no
desire to see folks from
nine to five, as long
as the things that we
sign up to do get
accomplished. As long as we're
not dropping, dropping any balls
or leaving anyone behind, if
we had the chance to
help another team. And we're
not taking that chance, I
think that's, that's a little,
that's a little lucky otherwise.
No, it's hard though. I
was getting into an argument
with someone online recently when
I made, what I thought
was a non noncontroversial statement
about how important work life
balance was. And for us
all, to remember why we
work. And there was a
whole thread on Twitter a
couple of days ago where
people were talking about, well,
there is no work life
balance. There was some, some
San Francisco VC type personality.
You saw that. And he
was like, there's only work
life integration. And I'm like,
really are we, we go
into the dictionary now and
just picking words, you know,
you can call it whatever
you want, but there's only
24 hours in a day.
And that feels so prescriptive.
It, it feels so it
feels so presumptive to know
It's a big old declarative
statement, that shelter It's one,
it's the one truce Cottman,
right? Which only light, only
work life integration. Nothing else
will know. That's what works
for some folks now for
everyone. And, and who am
I to know what works
best for you, Scott? Or
what, what works best for
anyone? I know what works
best for me. And I
make that work for me.
But if somebody else doesn't
want to have work life
balance, that's, you know, I
will, I will try to,
to figure out if there's
something that is coming from
a place of pain, or
if it's coming from a
place of ignorance or if
it's coming from a place
of insecurity. But as long
as none of those things,
to the best of my
ability are there, folks can
do what they want. They
can have balance where they
work only nine to five
and they shut their phone
off. Or they can come
in at 10 30 and
leave at three 30. And
then, you know, for three
months straight, they leave at
midnight because that's how their,
their brain works. As long
as nobody is burning out.
Which again, it's not purely
altruistic, right? Like this is
going to have a negative
impact. That's going to ripple
through my teams. So, so,
you know, if I do
think that requiring everyone to
act a certain way, takes
away their autonomy and nothing
good comes from that. Yeah,
it's definitely, that is one
of the blessings of being
in the tech industry is
for most people, unless you're
at a nine to five
kind of cube farm, which
I know some of my
listeners are, and I spent
many years doing that for
the most part, we do
have a certain amount of
autonomy in the sense of
there's core hours. There's get
your job done and you
can work from home or
take a Friday off and
things like that. And that's
why we'd like to see
more people get into the
tech industry. They can be
productive and possibly have some
amount of work life balance.
Right. And it's all about
shared expectations. I think if
everybody has signed on to
the plan, that's great. But
if one person sort of
doesn't have that doesn't deliver
on the expectations of the
team, then something's broken, right?
Like it's all about that
balance. And it's all about
being kind to your teammates
and making sure that you're
meeting their expectations so that
when you expect things from
them, that's returned. What are
a couple of tips that
you can maybe offer as
we get towards the end
of the show here about
helping others to break into
not only the tech industry,
but also maybe get interested
in data science if they,
they know how to say
the words, but they maybe
don't know what the right
direction, if they want to
go into that direction of
technology. Yeah. So you can
always find me on Twitter.
I'm happy to answer questions.
I'm, I'm also happy to,
to broadcast any work that
anybody has done. So if
you have a blog post
of some analysis that, that
you've done and you want
to reach a bigger audience,
let me know, and I'll
signal boost. And if you're
interested in just learning a
little bit more, there are
some really great resources. But
one of my favorites is
the becoming a data scientist
podcast, which has interviews with
lots of folks, none of
whom really have a traditional
background. So it's really interesting
to see the different paths
that folks took into, into
the field. I also really
like partially derivative the podcast
and both of those podcasts
also have very robust websites
backing them with, with lots
of tools and trainings and
links to, to the big
world of, of data science.
And even though when we
go to these places and
see that people have PhDs
or advanced degrees from advanced
places, should we still persist?
Oh my gosh. Yeah. So
first off I don't have
a PhD and I, and
I did actual real data
science work and got compensated
for it. So I was
a professional, the right. And,
and the other thing is
my team of all the
folks that, that are in
my team right now, it's
about a 50 50 of
PhDs, non PhDs, which I
think is also important because
it sort of brings this,
this really interesting mix of
folks who, who don't have
baked in assumptions. And it
forces us to think through
things rather than just the
fault to the training and
yeah, absolutely. You don't need
a PhD to become a
data scientist or to be
successful in it. Right. And
just like, you don't need
to be a singer to
do karaoke. Exactly. That's very
cool. Well, thank you so
much for chatting with me
today. Thank you, Scott. This
has been really, really great.
I appreciate the opportunity to
geek out and, and share
a little bit of, of
the empiricism love. Absolutely. My
pleasure. And this was Angela
Bassa. This has been another
episode of Hanselminutes and we'll
see you again next week.
.